Intro:  

Welcome to the next lecture unit in the lecture

chapter on information theory on cross-entropy and its

connection to Kullback-Leibler divergence.   


Slide 1:


Cross-entropy measures the average amount of information

required to represent an event from one distribution p,

using a predictive scheme based on another distribution q,

assuming that both have the same domain curly X as in KL.

The formula of the cross entropy is then denoted by H(p||q)

and is equivalent to summing over all possible values of x

in curly X and multiplying p(x) with the log of 1 over q(x).

We can then just write this as the sum over all x of p(x)

times log(q(x)), which is equivalent to the negative

expectation of log(q(x)) over p. We will discuss what this

formula means in the later chapters of information theory,

specifically when we talk about source coding. For now,

let’s summarize some important facts:  Entropy measures the

average amount of information if we optimally encode p.

Cross-entropy is the average amount of information if we sub

optimally encode p with q The KL divergence is simply the

difference between the two. The cross-entropy is what we

have just discussed and denoted similarly to the KL

divergence.   


Slide 2:  


What I just explained here with this

difference can also be nicely summarized through this

identity: The cross-entropy between P and Q is the entropy

of P plus the Kullback-Leibler divergence between P and Q.


Proof.


Slide 3:  


We can now generalize the concept for continuous density

functions to get the continuous cross-entropy between Q and

P. This is a direct generalization of the formula we have

seen before for the discrete case. We just use the integral

instead of the sum.  Watch out; this integral doesn't

necessarily have to exist for all cases. Again, this

function is not symmetric. We can prove this formula here.

We now just use differential entropy instead of discrete

entropy. Watch out; cross-entropy for the continuous case

can also become negative because this differential entropy

can be negative. You can check it for the simple case where

if you do cross-entropy between P and P, this would then be

differential entropy. As we already know, differential

entropy can be negative. That's already a case, or if you

compare the continuous cross-entropy between two densities

that are very peaked and which are also pretty close to each

other but not necessarily the same.  


Slide 4:  


If we consider our example from the KL divergence again with a

standard normal and a Laplace(0,3) distribution, we can

visualize this property quite nicely. In the top right plot

you can see the entropy of the standard normal as the area

under the blue curve and the KL divergence between the two

distributions as the area under the orange curve. We can now

add the entropy and the KL divergence and see that this is

equal to the cross entropy.  


Slide 5:  


If we switch p and q we can again see that the cross entropy

is not symmetric.  


Slide 6:
  

Because we now have continuous Kullback-Leibler and 

continuous cross-entropy available to us, 

we can now finally prove that for a given variance, the

distribution that maximizes differential entropy is the

Gaussian. I stated that even more broadly in the beginning

for multivariate Gaussians.


Proof.